---
Author: Kyle Jones Publication_date: September 17, 2022 Canonical_link: "https://medium.com/@kyle-t-jones/why-organizations-need-intrapreneurs-601a4f0b95e3" Export_from_medium_date: November 10, 2025
---
# Why Organizations Need Intrapreneurs ### Why Organizations Need Intrapreneurs


The pace of change for organizations has changed dramatically and the management practices of the 1910--20s (Frederick Winslow Taylor) and the 1950s (Alfred P. Sloan) are not capable of keeping up. Both Taylor and Sloan used management to mechanize and standardize work output. This technique is extremely useful for churning out widgets and cars but a hierarchical management structure that pushes all decisions up the chain of command wastes all the latent talent in the organization.

Companies must identify, assess and respond to challenges in real time and the new questions arise relentlessly each one could affect the solvency of the company.

Some existential threats are obvious. Others are subtle and almost imperceptible. Everyone is familiar with the story of Blockbuster. Once the dominant movie rental in the US, Blockbuster employed more than 80,000 people worldwide and an estimated 43 million members in the U.S. Their business model relied on two things: having movies people wanted to see physically available when they wanted them and charging a low rental price followed by steep late fees. Blockbuster had a good business model and their market cap rose to \$5 billion in 2002.

Netflix, by contrast, proposed to mail people DVDs and allow people to keep the movie as long as they like. This model violated both the concepts that Blockbuster thought were critical to their success. So in 2000 when Netflix offered itself up to Blockbuster to become the mailorder part of the movie rental giant, Blockbuster refused. The asking price? \$50 million.

In 2013, Blockbuster filed for bankruptcy. It had been unable to respond to the offers of Netflix, Redbox, and streaming services. The major incumbent, with every possible advantage, was destroyed by the scrappy upstart. Netflix's market capitalization? \$106 billion.

This story is repeated in other sectors: photography (Kodak), Music (double disruption, first with iPhones, then with streaming services like Pandora/Spotify), Newspapers and digital content, and stock brokerages (traditional brokerages Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers when bankrupt while unconventional and algorithmic traders like Bridgewater Associates prospered).

In each case, the successful incumbent was challenged by a less successful competitor. The commentator didn't do well in the categories that the incumbent thought were important and as a result, they didn't understand the threat. Our friend Ethan Martin summed this up well when he said, "We disregard innovations that are cheaper and worse because they are just that, worse. But therein lies the danger, because they don't stay worse forever."

This is where innovation becomes a key to the success of the business, companies need to innovate because if they don't someone else will and threaten the business.

Not only are companies competing for ideas, they are competing for talent. Pretty much every company will say that "our people are our biggest asset." But most don't treat their employees like a valuable asset. Jack Welch, CEO of GE from 1981 to 2001, tells a story of a repairman approaching him after Welch had held an employee forum. The repairman said the GE had paid for his hands for the past 20 years and they could have had his brain for free. If they had just asked him, the repairman could have told the designers what parts break on a dishwasher, improving reliability and customer satisfaction.

Traditional management models create departments for things like research and development. In addition to being a tax write-off, these departments are tasked with doing the organization's long-range thinking. However, innovation shouldn't be relegated to a function of just a few. When employees are free to innovate and create, they are more engaged with their work. Allowing all employees to innovate takes advantage of the immense talent within an organization and allows employees do find non-pecuniary rewards in their work.

### Building a culture from the workgroup up Culture starts with building a community. Successful communities have norms and foster trust. It is really

the trust that is the secret sauce for unleashing creativity. If employees don't trust their colleagues, they will not be willing to try things that could lead to breakthroughs. Afterall, Innovation is risky and many ideas won't work out. Without trust, employers are paying only for their employees' hands and not getting their heads. Culturally, we have become conditioned to only highlight success. To an extent, this makes sense. There isn't much for a news story to report that someone tried something and it didn't work. Even academic journals struggle with publishing results from unsuccessful experiments even though the scientific community holds that one can learn as much from a failed experiment as from a successful one.
### Culture is how we do things: it reflects our values and behaviors If culture eats strategy for breakfast, how does a company develop an intrapreneurial culture?

Culture derives from the stories an organization tells about itself and the behavior of its people. These must be aligned such that the way the organization says people act is how they actually act. Any discord in that alignment will be immediately obvious to the employees and erode trust. The good news is that companies can create a culture of innovation and "train" themselves to be more innovative.
### Every problem is a nail when all you have is a hammer Monitoring developed as an R&D activity because it was well suited for identifying big trends on

the horizon, 50 years ago. As the pace of innovation has increased, it is harder to see the single "next big thing." Probably because it isn't one thing but a confluence of things, some incremental innovations and some novel which, taken as a whole, present a transformational (if it is your idea) or existential (if it is your competitor's idea) innovation. Corporate innovation is very expensive so managers want to reduce the uncertainty around a potential opportunity but there is a cost for uncertainty reduction --- while the corporate R&D manager is waiting for clarity, the startup down the street is working to render the corporation obsolete. When it comes to evaluating opportunity at scale, nothing is better than corporate R&D. It applies resources, knowledge, and experience that can't be found in the garage. In many ways corporate R&D is like a finely tuned race car --- nothing can compare when it is on the track. But, it is not very useful on gravel and a lot of new ventures are rocky. Monitoring is one way to identify opportunities to fill the company's innovation pipeline. The innovation process will winnow out many of the opportunities (Too risky; Not feasible; Too expensive) and focus on a few that will be converted into products --- the company's best guess on what will be the next best thing. This process of selecting the optimal opportunity from among the opportunities in the funnel is what R&D departments do best. But there remains the issue of how to identify and select the new opportunities that will populate the innovation hopper.
### Being a Lean Startup The most popular approach to reducing costs is following the lean methodology in

which the objective is to invest only what is necessary to build a minimum viable product that can test the concept. - Corporate venturing: Some R&D departments have become quite skilled at buying innovation from others. This can be done to enhance project currently under development or to stockpile ideas for future evaluation. - Partnerships: Corporate-university partnerships have been a mainstay in many industries but a new form of partnership is developing between corporations and startups. These joint ventures reduce the risk to the corporation and provide much-needed capital to startups. - Distributed internal innovation teams: tapping the great potential of the company's employees for ideation, experimentation, and opportunity evaluation. These teams of volunteers ignore the formal corporate process of stage-gate reviews to just try things out. Much has been written recently in praise of fast failures and it seems that shareholders are willing to suffer a few missteps in pursuit of breakthroughs (Witness Google's graveyard of failed products). While the pace of innovation has increased, there seems to be a secondary trend towards 80% solutions which still leave a lot of uncertainty on the bones of the idea. Unfortunately, monitoring and competitive intelligence groups insulate corporate R&D from these trends. Rather than be lulled into a false sense of competitive security, monitoring groups should be the constant burr in the side of corporate R&D --- pushing for meaningful action not pushing paper for another docile report.
